Hi, Dave,

The focus definitely depends on temperature, in that cooler
temperatures mean higher focus values in general.  Usually one sees
the focus go up noticeably in the early part of the night as the dome
temp cools off; later on the temp typically doesn't change very much.
However, there are two additional factors that make predicting the
focus a real can of worms:

1) flexure, ie position in the sky, affects the focus more than
temperature does.  When following one target for 7-8 hrs, ie 3-4 hours
east to 3-4 hrs west, when the temperature is not changing much, the
focus typically changes slowly by perhaps 30 to 40 units in one
direction as the telescope approaches the meridian and then goes back
in the other direction after the meridian, overlaid by the temperature
variation, of course.  Moving 40 to 50 degrees in Dec can similarly
cause a change of around 30 units in focus.

2) there is some other variable - I don't know what it is - that
causes very large changes on long timescales.  For example, on Sunday
night and Monday night I observed the same star for 7 hrs, starting
and ending at the same clock time, and starting out about airmass 2.0
on both nights.  The dome temperature was about 5 F warmer when I
opened on the second night and ended up about 2 F warmer than the
first night by the time I closed, 58.5 F to 51.3 F on night 1 and 63.2
F to 53.6 F on night 2.  I observed the usual 30-40 unit focus
variations over the course of each night, mainly as a function of
positional changes, as would be expected from the relatively small
temperature variations.  However, the starting focus value on the
first night was 2534, a value I would normally only expect in the
winter (dome temps around 30 to 40 F?), whereas on the second night
the starting focus value was 2415 (still significantly higher than I
would have expected for such a warm dome).  On the 3rd night, the dome
temp was 64.8 F when I opened and 56.3 at the end of the night, not
much different from night 2.  I observed a different target whose RA
was about 40 minutes further East and whose dec was +56 instead of +37
(not that big a change) and again I observed it all night, starting at
airmass 1.9.  However, I was surprised to see that the starting focus
for the 3rd night was 2327.  While that's much more typical of what I
would normally see in warm weather, it was a big change from the
previous night considering that not much else was that different.  The
focus values went up by maybe 20 units for the first hour or so (dome
cooling off), then went back down slowly for a couple of hours, by
roughly another 20 units as the telescope tracked toward the
meridian. However, about 1 hr 30 minutes east of the meridian, the
focus needed to go higher again, moving slowly but steadily up to
about 2350 by about an hour west of the meridian.  Then the focus
started going up much more sharply than it had during the previous two
nights and ended up near 2400.

So all I do is monitor the focus, keep the stars as round as possible
and maintain about the same fwhm values for three ref stars spaced in
a wide triangle in the field of view throughout the entire light curve
for each object.  I don't try to predict it because I don't know what
causes the overall focus level changes.  I just take it as it comes.

Betsy
